a news just coming in the number of dead
uh Palestinian dead has risen to
330 we understand Let's cross to Gaza to
yumna elide who's live for us there and
yumna so we've been hearing about the
number the large number of Israeli
fatalities tell us what's happened
there yes well nick uh the violent raids
or Israeli raids and bombardments over
civil uh several civilian homes across
the Gaza Strip in different areas is
intensifying the violent way uh uh Air
Raids are shaking the Gaza Strip in
different areas here in Gaza City many
neighborhoods have been targeted many
civilian homes the last targeting was
for abua family home in B hanon that's
in the northern part of the Gaza Strip
17 people have died only from that or
have been killed from that bombardment
on their homes now we did uh see uh
messages being sent to the uh uh mobile
phones or cell phones of the civilians
by the Israeli military telling them to
evacuate their homes especially the
homes that uh are uh AC on on the
borders of Gaza from north to south and
to go to the uh central part of Gaza
City but now we're seeing more messages
being sent to people who are in Gaza
City to still go to the center of Gaza
City like in in the eastern part of Gaza
City and in the western part of Gaza
City the the the bombardments that we're
seeing every now and then uh the uh the
the killing of civilians the bombarding
of their homes over their heads this is
really extraordinary in just 24 hours of
the beginning of the launching of the
iron swords operation towards Gaza over
330 people have been killed and over
2,000 others have been injured Yar as
we're chatting we can see images of
boats I think in the harbor there just a
blaze one particular one is a blaze
anyway with smoke spiraling into the sky
and not not sure if you know anything
particularly about that but it's all
part of the ongoing assault I guess
yes well some parts now the bombardments
in Gaza Nick are literally going uh in
in different directions at the same time
so some people or uh some civilians at
their homes would get calls to evacuate
their homes While others won't and the
air strikes would happen at the same
time which is making it very difficult
for the civil defense teams the Medical
Teams to act rapid ridly to get to the
targeted places uh since their their
resources and capabilities are very
limited and that's why uh even though
there there are people who could be
under the rebels of their homes uh it's
just civilians from that neighborhood
who are risking their lives to go and to
help them out of the rubble this is what
we have been seeing in the past uh 24
hours and until now he you know we need
to talk about cause and effect in all of
this and how G's living under stifling
land there and sea blockade which is Led
no small part to what's been happening
and then I can see behind you I think
there's uh garans collecting food is
that from a a refugee Outpost what's
happening
[Music]
there well here Nick I'm in one of the
unest schools uh this is a shelter now
for displaced pal Palestinian families
in this school alone there are over
2,000 people crammed alog together in
just 40 uh classrooms of this school now
these families here they have fled their
homes because their homes were either by
the borders and they were told and asked
to evacuate or their homes were uh
targeted and destroyed in the past hours
so BAS basically ARA has opened 44
shelters and schools all together in
different areas of the Gaza Strip we
have over uh
20,000 people in these shelters now of
course when you're going to talk about
humanitarian conditions in these schools
these people have fled with almost
nothing some of them brought uh in very
little belongings very little amounts of
clothes for their children and others
have to flee quickly uh running for
their lives most of the people here came
in last night but the other uh uh number
of the people came in this morning and
of course we're still witnessing more
people as these messages are uh being
received and they're being sent by the
Israeli Army to the civilians to tell
them to evacuate their home
yeah it's it's incredible isn't it you
know you're talking about people who
fled their homes what is it like with
this sense of the impending action
Israeli action that is doubtless coming
at some point how are Garin how are you
feeling about what's looking to be about
to
happen well there's a very high sense of
fear and and worry among the people here
I mean just right here here in this
school where I'm standing there is a
police station now this is just a
governmental police station but the
people here are afraid that this police
station which is just opposite to their
uh to the school to this othera school
could be targeted without prior notice
like what we have been uh witnessing the
past few hours so yes they are here
because they they were forced to
evacuate their homes but at the safe
time there is no sense of uh there's no
sense that they are safe there is no
sense that they are protected in this uh
shelter that they were forced to come
into all right thanks yumna children in
the middle of it right there behind you
yumna thanks a lot let's uh head over to
West Jerusalem sah hirat is there for us
and Sarah so numbers of Israeli dead
gone up to 600 and more at least
600 have the Israeli government saying
anything about this
yet I mean they the number keeps
increasing every few hours and as Rob
was saying we're expecting that will
continue to go up of course no one
imagined that there would be that number
of casualties however uh just uh news
that's come in that the Israeli cabinet
has uh approved uh what's considered a
war Clause uh to go ahead what that
means is that Israel can then take
significant what they call military
action I.E that would lead to war it
does have to uh be confirmed by a Kessa
committee tomorrow we do know that prime
minister Benjamin Netanyahu made that
very clear on multiple occasions on
Saturday when all this happens saying
that we are at War but what that means
is is that it just makes it more legally
binding it also means that the Prime
Minister as well as the defense minister
won't need to consult the cabinet every
time they want to take military
decisions so that's the latest in terms
of high level approvals from the
government also we've heard from uh the
Israeli uh military that there seems to
have been uh some uh initiative coming
from neighboring country Egypt with
Hamas to allow the release of uh those
Israeli citizens as U specifically they
were talking about citizens that will
that were taken over the border on
Saturday into Gaza they're talking of
those are specific ages babies children
and the elderly Israel says it's not
part of that initiative but it's no
surprise that Egypt being a neighboring
country that always uh is the first one
of the first countries when these things
happen here or there is tension or
fighting or a flare in violence or as we
see a war they will always try and come
in and negotiate or try and bring
parties together there's also been a
phone call from uh the Jordanian uh
president to his Egyptian counterpart
where they've agreed that tensions need
to to uh uh the situation needs to
deescalate and that would mean uh uh a
request almost to Israel to uh not uh go
as far as um it seems to be heading in
that direction to reconsider the amount
of force uh that it will use against
Gaza considering that it's uh such a
densely populated area now in terms of
looking forward uh what the Yeah I was
going to say in terms of moving forward
specifically when it comes to its
military plan nothing is clear just yet
um obviously there's been a lot of uh
conversations amongst people whether
Israel will send uh foot soldiers in for
example however that remains quite
tricky simply because of those uh people
that have been held captive whether it's
soldiers or whether it's civilians in
Gaza so Israel is going to want to make
sure that their safety is Paramount they
can't come back with dead bodies if you
like um there's also been we've been
hearing of incidences uh just in the
last hour as well of two Palestinians
that they caught Palestinian fighters in
one of the areas in the South along that
border they've made arrests several of
several arrests throughout the day and
that's significant and interesting
because in the past uh the Israeli and
and not just in the past I mean we see
this every day when it comes to
Palestinians or anyone that they deem as
a Palestinian fighter or armed an armed
Palestinian they tend to uh shoot them
on the spot but this hasn't been
happening they have um been making
arrests some of those are dead they've
said 300 to 400 Hamas Fighters have been
killed but they are also making arrests
and that leads to a question of what do
they plan to do with those that have
been arrested obviously it has happened
where Israelis have been kidnapped Gad
shal was a huge uh uh big deal a few
years ago and could that be used as a
bargaining chip where there will be a
change of uh prisoners or those that are
held captive all of this remains to be
seen right now Israel is working on
making sure they get rid of the uh
Palestinian fights they say that's their
priority evacuating people along that
southern border and then figuring out
what the next step is of course in terms
of Hezbollah and Lebanon they will not
want this to escalate uh of to be to
which is what exactly what the Egyptian
president and Jordanian president saying
that they don't want it to destabilize
the region and that's why they are Keen
to deescalate tensions right now indeed
Sarah going to leave it there for now
thanks very much Sarah har there thank
you